---
layout: post
title:  "From The Analogue State to the Digital State
"
date:   2015-05-06 03:28:01 +0000
description:
f_image:
permalink:
categories: essay
tag:
language: en
---


From The Analogue State to the Digital State

Like it or not, technology has become part of our daily lives. An increasing number of people around the world, in countries rich and poor, own devices that we use daily, be it a tablet, smart phone or computer. These devices allow us, in theory, to communicate, organize our days, stay connected, and be more productive. This theory that devices help rather than hinder us is a subject of debate. Through my major and field of Interaction Design, I have studied how humans interact with everything from technology to household products and even varied life experiences. Given my area of study, I am intrigued by the theory that screens, apps, and social media enhance our lives as I question how well the average human is doing in managing all of it.  I share the questions and concerns arising in media and everyday discourse regarding the connection between the increased use of different platforms and devices to stay organized and connected and whether we, as individuals and potentially a society, have become increasingly distracted, disconnected, and less productive in the process.
A quintessential paradigm shift within technology exists with the transition from a landline to a smart phone.  It is difficult to believe that as recently as 15 years ago the vast majority of American households had a landline installed in their home.  If no one was home at the time to take a call, one would most likely have an answering machine attached to the phone where one could hear the missed messages. The phone did not follow us; rather, it stayed in the house and waited for calls to come in. This all started to change with the introduction of the cellular phone, which originated in 1992 and was invented by IBM. Through the years these new phones evolved dramatically with the largest shift occurring in 2007 with the invention of the iPhone.  Suddenly, we held a veritable computer in our hands. (Ozgur 2011) The innovation of these devices then caused a dramatic shift in consumer demand for landlines. Today, over 40 percent of households have dropped their landline phones, with the percentage growing everyday. (Channick 2014) Wilson Miner, a digital product designer in San Francisco, states, “to get to a user base of 50 million users, it took radio 40 years, the television 10 years, the iPhone 3 years and you-tube 6 months.” (Minor 2011) We see what could be best described as an exponential increase in the interest and purchase of a smart phone compared to past technologies. Multiple reasons drive this. For instance, they are eminently portable, providing access to email, websites, calendars, photos and live communication with our friends and family at a moment’s notice. Smart phones also provide access to innumerable apps to download based on our personal needs. There are over 60,000 apps added to the Apple App Store each month. (Unknown Author 2014) These applications run the gamut of helping us organize, calendar, read, play, socialize, entertain, and search the internet.  One could easily conclude that consumers are on overload purely with the number of choices they currently have when it comes to apps; who has the time to review thousands of apps just to find one good one? And, just when you think you have the best app possible for a calendar, a new one comes out that you must get and try out to see if it is indeed better.
Another device that most of us own or have access to is a computer. The computer was invented long before the smart phone, but what has been a game changer has been mobile computing. This new technology allowed a smart phone to now communicate with the computer.  So, if we receive mail on our computer, we could now receive it on our phone. If we had a calendar on our computer, we could now view it on our smart phone. Mobile computing connected our two devices to talk with one another. This was one of the reasons the smart phone became and remains so popular. Add in the innovation that has occurred with the computer and you get devices like tablets, iPad’s, laptops, and other portable devices that can be taken with us anywhere to keep us connected. In just a matter of years, 42 percent of all Americans now own a tablet. (Zickuhr and Lee 2014) With this huge shift in portability of devices, one can discern that it is harder to have an off button. Thirty years ago the number of ways to contact an individual at home was very limited; short of stopping by in person one’s main alternative was the phone.  Now, for many people they could be contacted by myriad methods all in a matter of moments throughout the day, from text and social media, to email and whatever the latest online fad might be. Social scientists should continue to ask some serious questions about what it means for humans to constantly take in such a high level of input.  
The underlying assumption to much of marketing for technology is that we become better, more connected people with the innovation at our fingertips. Tim Kreider from the New York Times notes, “Busyness serves as a kind of existential reassurance, a hedge against emptiness; obviously your life cannot possibly be silly or trivial or meaningless if you are so busy, completely booked, in demand every hour of the day.” (Sacks 2013)  So, does this advanced technology feeds our egos more than it feeds our souls?  Do we find relief from life’s anxieties through the ritual of distraction, found in abundance within the apps of a smartphone?  And, if so, is this appearance of connection with individuals and the world simply superficial, actually imposing roadblocks to the kind of deeper, meaningful connection that used to define human communities?  Instead of being left in awe by the latest technological wonder, we would do well to consider the devices’ implications for everyday life more deeply.  
One way in which devices are omnipresent is thorough the ability to receive “notifications” via their screens. Through different settings on our phones and tablets we can choose what apps we want to “notify” us with updates or news. Texts and emails can be pushed immediately to the end user on our home screens so that we know immediately when we receive a new message of some sort. Although this may be handy for most, some question how this type of constant access to “notifications” impedes our day and productivity. In my own life, I know that I am always somewhat taken aback when I receive a text notification after midnight from someone. I wonder who possibly thinks that this is ok when the one on the receiving end is sleeping. It seems that when we were in the world of landlines, people were more mindful about when they reached out to give you a call. I think it was rare to get a call on a landline, except in an emergency. Now, however, that barrier of time has broken down; we see another paradigm shift in expectations around communication. People think less about the timing of when they send a text, email or call. It has also been my experience that the response time that is expected with some of these forms of communication is immediate.  Perhaps because the sender expects that you will receive virtually instant notification of the text or email, expectations are heightened that one will respond with great haste. I have received texts from friends who subsequently become upset because I did not respond back immediately. While I experience frustration from these often unspoken expectations, I also question how one person could truly engage another in deep discourse on matters of importance when one is reduced down to size-restricted tweets with the expectation of an immediate reply.  How many arguments would be avoided if everyone had to wait 12 hours before hitting send on an e-mail?
The practical ramifications of these communication innovations are becoming increasingly clear.  For example, at a time when vehicle safety has hit an all-time high, there is also a rise in accidents due to inattentive driving caused by checking electronics.  People have a need to check their devices frequently, including when they are behind the wheel of a car. This distraction of mixing texting and driving together causes serious, sometimes deadly consequences. According to the National Safety Council, texting and driving causes 1,600,000 accidents per year and 11 teen deaths every day, often in a matter of seconds. (Online Schools, Unknown)
A new device introduced this month is the iWatch. This is a new wearable by Apple that essentially pushes app notifications to a device that you wear on your wrist. Articles already have started to surface questioning if people should be allowed to wear it while they are driving. Since most states ban the use of a smart phone while driving, people are wondering if people should be allowed to use a watch that serves the same purpose. Apple has sold over 1 million watches already and the verdict is unclear if laws will be enacted to ban interactive wearables while driving. Last year the state of California did ban the use of Google Glass while driving, indicating that it is no different a distraction than using a smart phone. (Walter 2015) On the flip side, there are companies that are trying to innovate to replace the hand held screen altogether and make it more of an affordance on the vehicle itself. A company called RayGo has come up with an affordance that attaches to the driver’s steering wheel. This in turn syncs with your bluetooth and smart phone that then allow hands free communication between the devices. It also can sense if you are turning the car or driving fast and will adjust communicating with you under the conditions that the device is experiencing. (Shandrow 2015)
The increase in device usage has even impacted one of the simplest tasks known to human-kind, around since we existed on earth: walking. An average observer can note how we have become a society that no longer looks straight ahead when we walk, but rather have become people who look down at our devices, interacting with them during every free moment. There have been news reports of pedestrian injuries on the rise due to a lack of being aware while walking, including a 14 year old boy walking off a 6 foot high bridge to a 23 year old man being hit by a car. (Shaver 2014) Accidents are occurring on a daily basis because we are distracted with the screen and fearful we will miss something important if we put it down. Some say it is the pedestrians that are keeping our emergency rooms in business.
The innovations that have driven an ever-increasing array of devices clearly can have both positive qualities and negative ramifications. There are clear benefits to being able to pick up a cell phone, at any time, at any place, and make a call around the world; this would have been merely a dream 30 years ago. Yet, as a society we need to take an assertive role if these technologies end up doing more to divide and distract us than to connect us. If negative patterns and rituals are emerging out of new technologies, then we need to step back and see how we can minimize the impact to indeed make our life simpler, more fulfilling, and connective.  


References
Channick, Robert. "40% of Homes Now without a Landline." Chicago Tribune. July 8, 2014. Accessed May 1, 2015.
Miner, Wilson - When We Build. Performed by Wilson Miner. United States: Vimeo, 2011. Film. Accessed April 28, 2015.
Online Schools. "DWI: Driving While Intexticated." Texting and Driving Safety. Accessed May 1, 2015.
Ozgur. "The Smartphone Revolution: The Growth of Smartphones & Exchange ActiveSync." Mobility and Email Blog. May 12, 2011. Accessed May 6, 2015.
Sacks, David. "Siri, Focus My Attention." Medium. 2013. Accessed April 30, 2015.
Shandrow, Kim. "This Gadget Lets You Text and Use Apps While Driving, Without Looking at Your Smartphone." Entrepreneur. March 4, 2015. Accessed May 1, 2015.
Shaver, Katherine. "Safety Experts to Pedestrians: Put the Smartphones down and Pay Attention." Washington Post. September 20, 2014. Accessed April 30, 2015.
Unknown. "Birth, Life and Death of an App." Adjust. July 1, 2014. Accessed April 30, 2015.
Walter, Derek. "Should You Wear Your Apple Watch While Driving?" Fast Company. April 30, 2015. Accessed May 1, 2015.
Zickuhr, Kathryn, and Lee Rainie. "E-Reading Rises as Device Ownership Jumps." Pew Research Center. January 16, 2014. Accessed April 29, 2015. http://www.pewinternet.org/2014/01/16/e-reading-rises-as-device-ownership-jumps/.
