---
layout: post
title:  "Data Centers and Dirty Energy"
date:   2014-05-01 03:28:01 +0000
description:
f_image: /assets/test.gif
permalink: /Data-Centers-and-Dirty-Energy/
source_url:
categories: blog
tag:
language: en
---

William Felker  2014/05/01

1

Data Centers and Dirty Energy
 Within today’s culture there is an ever-growing awareness of the effect that humans have on the planet. Traditionally this mindset revolves around tangible objects like paper plates, solar energy, and specifically things that we can see or touch. However, there is a gap in awareness specifically around where our online data lives, how it gets to us, and what exactly is powering it. This is a part of a multifaceted problem which includes a lack of consumer awareness as well as the reality that some companies, including a few of the data center giants, are not willing to adhere to any form of power or data conservation plan.
 The society in which we live has changed drastically in the last few years on how we interact with digital devices, shop online, search the web for information or socialize through different social media outlets. The digital data that we are using has increased exponentially. In August of 2013, Americans spent more time using digital media than actually watching television. The average time a person spends online everyday is 5 hours. The device that Americans are using the most to interact with this digital data is the mobile phone. ("Digital Set to Surpass TV in Time Spent with US Media.") Every time we use the internet to access this type of data it travels through data centers, which are where information that we are accessing is processed, stored and then acts as a portal for sending out the data to the end user. A simple task of sending a photograph via email is a task that takes a journey through hundreds of networks until it reaches the data center and then arrives at the end user. (Glanz, James. "Power, Pollution and the Internet.") There is also much debate about how we are going to progress in this industry with all the cable that exists between data centers and consumers. The cable lines that connect the data centers to ultimately the end user are also in question. The technology is progressing at such a rapid pace that the cables become bottlenecks for

William Felker   2 2014/05/01
information to travel through almost as fast as they are updated. One solution that companies like Microsoft are trying is to transport information through wireless technology by applying wireless links on top of server racks. (Eisenberg, Anne. "A Wireless Road Around Data Traffic Jams." The New York Times)
 These tens of thousands of data centers hold vast amounts of information, but also produce large amounts of energy waste and most are horrible for the environment. These data centers consume worldwide about 30 billion watts of electricity and often waste up to 90 percent of the electricity that they use. The United States uses the most data center power in the world. (Cook, Gary. "." . N.p., n.d. Web. 29 Apr. 2014) Today’s consumers want immediate access to the internet 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, with zero time off from accessibility which is just driving this problem further. Companies cannot risk losing customers by not allowing the consumer constant access to information they want. This causes the data centers to use extreme amounts of electricity, along with back up systems in case of electrical failure which consist of generators and lead-acid batteries. To add more fuel to the fire, the data center industry has no government agency that regulates them or their usage of electricity. Since most data that a user accesses is personal, many data centers are set up where they are in unmarked buildings or protected due to the end user’s privacy and therefore total data usage cannot be tracked. The New York Times investigated data center energy usage and discovered that even “the federal government was unable to determine how much energy its own data centers consume”. (Glanz, James. "Power, Pollution and the Internet.") The EPA however estimates that the government data centers use consume 10% of energy in the U.S. ("Data Centers and Energy Efficiency." Alliance to Save Energy. N.p., n.d.) It is expected that between 2012 - 2017, data use will triple from 44 to 121 exabytes. To put this number in perspective one exabyte equals one billion gigabytes. ("What is an Exabyte (EB)? - Definition from Techopedia." Techopedias) The main cause of this expected growth is due to consumers’ usage of video and

William Felker   3 2014/05/01
audio streaming. Half of internet traffic in the US today is generated by using Netflix and YouTube, with YouTube being the biggest company that generates data. (Cook, Gary. "." . N.p., n.d. Web. 29 Apr. 2014) The increase in consumer ownership of tablets and smart phones are also the problem: “Although charging up a single tablet or smart phone requires a negligible amount of electricity, using either to watch an hour of video weekly consumes annually more electricity in the remote networks than two new refrigerators use in a year”, says the National Mining Association and the American Coalition for Clean Coal Energy. ("IT now 10 percent of world's electricity consumption, report finds." • The Register) This is almost an incomprehensible amount of energy consumption that most consumers are not aware of as an issue.
 As an awareness grows regarding data centers and energy consumption, so does the knowledge regarding what companies are the biggest culprits in this consumption. Twitter, Amazon, Digital Reality, and Dupont are among the worst. Amazon, which retains a large part of the internet usage market, is one of the biggest culprits of dirty energy. They also do not report any information regarding its footprint to anyone. (Cook, Gary. "." . N.p., n.d. Web. 29 Apr. 2014) Some of these data centers work for other major companies which help this “dirty energy” secret grow. Dupont, for example, is a data center that is one of the biggest in the US which works for companies like Zynga, Microsoft, Yahoo and Dropbox. Amazon is another giant powerhouse that works with Yelp, Pinterest, Netflix, Vine, Airbnb, Tumblr, Vimeo and Spotify, just to name a few. One can easily see how this consumption problem keeps growing as these companies are being spun together in a data center web.(Your Online World: #ClickClean or Dirty?." Greenpeace) Most of these companies use a form of nuclear power and/or coal which is horrible for the environment.
 On the flip side of this energy consumption crisis, there are companies which are trying to change the ways in which they run their data centers. Currently companies like Ebay, IBM, Telecity and Equinix fall somewhere in the middle of this energy crisis taking steps to make

William Felker   4 2014/05/01
small changes that lead to big ones. Ebay is a popular consumer brand which is behind other companies its size for innovation but is making changes within the company to change over to renewable energy and lower its overall energy consumption.("Your Online World: #ClickClean or Dirty?." Greenpeace)
 The companies that are taking a commitment in using 100% renewable energy in the data center realm are Apple, Google and Facebook. These companies are also allowing for total transparency as they try to meet this goal. An action step that Facebook is taking is having a data center in Iowa being powered by wind turbines. This makes Facebook the largest purchaser of turbines worldwide. The company also built an energy efficient data center in Oregon which reduced energy consumption by 38% compared to its other facilities.("Data Centers and Energy Efficiency." Alliance to Save Energy) Google is also an innovator by working together with its vendors to expand renewable energy to create a green internet. The goal of these companies is to switch to solar and wind power and make the need for coal, nuclear and gas power obsolete. (Cook, Gary. "." . N.p., n.d. Web. 29 Apr. 2014) One company in particular that is getting many accolades is Apple. Within just a two year period they have worked passionately to eliminate all nuclear, coal and natural gas from their centers and earned a perfect score of 100 percent by Greenpeace. Apple is using solar, wind, and geothermal plants in place of other dirty forms of energy. The company is also being totally transparent which hopefully will help other companies be motivated to change. ("Your Online World: #ClickClean or Dirty?." Greenpeace.)
 Educating the consumer about this dirty energy secret will hopefully catapult and pressure companies and government to change and encourage consumers to think about their digital habits and make changes as well. When searching the internet on this issue one can find consumer advocacy blogs popping up exposing and educating other consumers about the companies which are contributing to this dirty energy problem. On the ethical consumer blog,

William Felker   5 2014/05/01
they reference a Greenpeace article stating, “Those companies, most notably Amazon Web Services, are choosing how to power their infrastructure based solely on lowest electricity prices, without consideration to the impact their growing electricity footprints have on human health or the environment.” ("Story of the Day Index - Amazon criticised for dirty data services." Story of the Day Index) It is articles and blogs like the ethical consumer that will help spread the word on this dirty energy crisis and create change. A big thanks to Greenpeace which has been a major contributor in trying to educate consumers about this growing problem by providing hard data about a wide range of companies.


















William Felker  2014/05/01
6


Bibliography
Cook, Gary. "." . N.p., n.d. Web. 29 Apr. 2014. <http://www.greenpeace.org/usa/Global/ usa/planet3/PDFs/clickingclean.pdf>.

"Data Centers and Energy Efficiency." Alliance to Save Energy. N.p., n.d. Web. 21 Apr. 2014. <http://www.ase.org/resources/data-centers-and-energy-efficiency>.
"Digital Set to Surpass TV in Time Spent with US Media." - eMarketer. N.p., n.d. Web. 26 Apr. 2014. <http://www.emarketer.com/Article/Digital-Set-Surpass-TV-Time-Spent- with-US-Media/1010096>.

Eisenberg, Anne. "A Wireless Road Around Data Traffic Jams." The New York Times. The New York Times, 14 Jan. 2012. Web. 29 Apr. 2014. <http://www.nytimes.com/ 2012/01/15/business/a-wireless-way-around-data-center-traffic-jams.html>.

Glanz, James. "Power, Pollution and the Internet." The New York Times. The New York Times, 22 Sept. 2012. Web. 26 Apr. 2014. <http://www.nytimes.com/2012/09/23/ technology/data-centers-waste-vast-amounts-of-energy-belying-industry-image.html? pagewanted=all&_r=0>.
"IT now 10 percent of world's electricity consumption, report finds." • The Register. N.p., n.d. Web. 22 Apr. 2014. <http://www.theregister.co.uk/2013/08/16/ it_electricity_use_worse_than_you_thought/>.

"Story of the Day Index - Amazon criticised for dirty data services." Story of the Day Index - Amazon criticised for dirty data services. N.p., n.d. Web. 23 Apr. 2014. <http:// www.ethicalconsumer.org/corporatenews/storyoftheday/entryid/1539/amazon-criticised- for-dirty-data-services.aspx>.
"What is an Exabyte (EB)? - Definition from Techopedia." Techopedias. N.p., n.d. Web. 25 Apr. 2014. <http://www.techopedia.com/definition/1039/exabyte-eb>.

"Your Online World: #ClickClean or Dirty?." Greenpeace. N.p., n.d. Web. 23 Apr. 2014. <http://www.greenpeace.org/usa/en/campaigns/global-warming-and-energy/A-Green- Internet/clickingclean/>.
